an air traffic controller isn't that
person on the ground who's standing in
front of your airplane waving their
hands around
that's an aircraft marshal these
specialists assist pilots in stopping
turning and shutting the engines down
air traffic controllers are responsible
for the safe plane movement in the air
and this professionals bound to have
some exciting secrets air traffic
controllers speak not only English the
language of the skies but also aviation
English it consists of about 300 words
and is a combination of good old English
and professional jargon this language
was invented to prevent air controllers
and pilots from miss hearing each other
in their job even tiny miscommunication
can lead to disastrous consequences
unfortunately not all air traffic
controllers have a stunning office view
it's hard not to notice control towers
they're the first thing that catch your
eye at any Airport but those controllers
who work in tall glass towers are only
in charge of the airport and the
airspace right above the rest of the
airspace is controlled by professionals
who are very likely to stay in dark
rooms without windows plus they can be
miles away from the airports or sky
sectors they monitor when you're flying
more than a dozen air traffic
controllers take part in delivering you
to your destination safely it may seem
like there's a lot of space in the sky
but it's just an illusion like honeycomb
it's divided into sections each with its
own highways and crossroads all sections
have different sizes depending on the
number of these cross roads and the
length of the highways the bigger the
section is the more controllers are
needed so let's save the tower
controllers lead your plane from the
gates of the runway and then get it
airborne five miles later your aircraft
becomes a responsibility of the approach
controllers they handle airplanes during
their climb and descent when the jet
reaches a height of 18,000 feet the
route Center controllers take the reins
these specialists use radar to guide the
planes flying at cruising altitudes
after that right before the descent
the approach controllers take over again
it's not uncommon for air traffic
controllers to see unidentified flying
objects it mostly happens at night
that's when controllers usually spot
blinking lights that are coming from
airplanes but don't rush to blame UFOs
air traffic radars are so sensitive that
they can easily pick up flocks of birds
big clouds or even massive trucks on the
ground or flying saucers even though air
traffic controllers have special
equipment all of them have to be trained
in meteorology if the machines fail
they'll have to figure out the wind
speed and direction with the help of a
wind indicator and to find out how good
or bad the visibility is controllers
look at specific landmarks neighboring
buildings water and cell towers most air
controllers find it exhausting to handle
pilots with difficult accents yep
everyone whose job is to fly an airplane
is supposed to speak English fluently
it's the official aviation language
after all and still communication
problems with non-native speakers do
exist when talking to a pilot with a
heavy accent a controller tries to speak
very slowly pronounce all the words
distinctly and avoid route changes by
all means Airport tower controllers
don't spend all their time staring at
the radar screens half of the time they
have to rely on their eyes some
specialists confess they can deal with
more traffic when they see what's
happening directly in front of them ever
had a delay due to bad weather one of
the reasons could be air traffic
controllers being unable to see the
airspace clearly air traffic controllers
have to train their voices they can talk
quietly and indistinctly in their
private life but at work the way they
speak has to change dramatically their
voices need to be loud and clear and
sometimes controllers deliberately
exaggerate the pronunciation of
particular words it's crucial otherwise
pilots can misunderstand the broadcasted
information
if something goes wrong with the
airplane communication system that's
what controllers call radio failure the
airport tower uses a signal lamp to
deliver messages to the pilot with the
help of this lab pilots figure out when
and where they can land all of them know
where they need to look to get light
directions from the controllers and what
different colors mean for example if a
pilot sees a green ray of light they
know they can land if there are some
obstacles on the runway traffic
controllers change this signal to
flashing red light and the pilot
realizes that landing is dangerous air
traffic controllers aren't going to be
replaced by robots any time soon they
use a lot of machines and automated
systems in their work radars do help get
passengers from point A to point B but
all this equipment wouldn't last without
human specialists who make sure it
doesn't malfunction air traffic
controllers often use binoculars even
though there are tons of advanced
observation tools at hand this seemingly
outdated object is as useful as decades
ago controllers used binoculars to look
for different air space invaders like
drones or flocks of birds plus this tool
can come in handy to pinpoint objects on
runways and spot planes and vehicles
there are a lot of myths about this
profession for example you might have
seen an action movie or two where air
traffic controllers talked an aircraft
down to a safe landing it can't happen
in real life but such cases are
extremely rare they mostly occur with
small planes flown by pilots who are
used to relying on their vision in bad
weather when the visibility is low such
pilots can lose control over the
situation and air-traffic controllers
have to assist them in landing the plane
but with large commercial airplanes the
pilot is the final authority
they're responsible for flying the
aircraft and the passenger safety
most of the time air traffic controllers
are either bored out of their minds
especially during tedious and monotonous
night shifts or stressed out they tend
to miss family gatherings and birthdays
and often have to work on weekends and
holidays
what's more controllers must stay
completely concentrated on the task at
hand because a critical situation can
come up at any moment an air traffic
controller never knows what a curve
every shift is going to throw them this
unpredictability can keep a person
rather tense especially during bad
weather or busy traffic that's why air
traffic controllers have to take regular
breaks to relax all airlines have their
own rules but it's usually a break of 20
to 40 minutes every 60 to 90 minutes
another misconception many people
believe in is frequent near misses
happening because air traffic
controllers are exhausted and stressed
out mistakes do happen but they aren't
nearly as numerous as you can imagine
controllers are super attentive to
vertical and horizontal distances
between planes aka separation distances
and make sure aircrafts stick to their
routes and finally you have to fit very
strict requirements if you want to
become an air traffic controller they
can't do without perfect vision
lightning fast reactions and a sharp
mind you also have to be able to think
clearly and make the right decisions
under pressure